Add 'Burger Discounts' chapter (#34)
melange-re/melange-for-react-devs: docs/burger-discounts/index.md

# Burger Discounts

International Burger Day falls on Tuesday of next week, so Madame Jellobutter
decides to celebrate it by running the classic "buy 2 burgers get 1 free"

> promotion. Add a new file `src/order-confirmation/Discount.re`:

Reviewer: Do you think further introduction is needed? It seems this chapter dives into code without explaining much what we intend to solve / implement.

E.g.

> To define the promotion more precisely and avoid customer complaints, Madame Jellobutter requests that for every two burgers found in the list of items for an order, we will pick the price of the cheaper one and give the more expensive one for free.

(or st like that)

Author: Add an explanation of the promotion in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/34/commits/cc1c1729e945dfb4b53de6f82a850f606096e8e7

```reason
// Buy 2 burgers, get 1 free
let getFreeBurger = (items: array(Item.t)) => {
  let burgers =
    items

>     |> Js.Array.sortInPlaceWith(~f=(item1, item2) =>

Reviewer: Should we create a copy of the items array before mutating it? Not sure how far we want to go as OCaml supports mutations just fine, and OCaml arrays can be mutated "sneakily". Maybe we should just revisit if eventually this example is reimplemented with lists?

Edit: I see the section below about testing for mutation and updates in the function, so feel free to ignore this comment 😄

        - compare(Item.toPrice(item1), Item.toPrice(item2))
      )
    |> Js.Array.filter(~f=item =>
        switch (item) {
        | Burger(_) => true
        | Sandwich(_)
        | Hotdog => false
        }
      );

  switch (burgers) {

>   | [|Burger(_), Burger(cheaperBurger)|] =>

Reviewer: This won't work if the order has 4 burgers (or 6, 8...) , but I guess it's ok.

Edit: I saw that a better fix is explained later, feel free to ignore this comment.

>     Some(Item.Burger.toPrice(cheaperBurger))

Reviewer: This logic might need to be explained too ("out of the two burgers, you will get charged for the cheaper one").

Author: I added an explanation earlier in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/34/commits/cc1c1729e945dfb4b53de6f82a850f606096e8e7, and hopefully the variable name `cheaperBurger` reinforces the understanding a bit

- [Js.Array.sortInPlaceWith](https://melange.re/v3.0.0/api/re/melange/Js/Array/index.html#val-sortInPlaceWith)
  takes a callback function `~f` with type signature `('a, 'a) => int` (accept
  two arguments of the same type and `int`). It's used to used to sort the items
  by price (highest to lowest).
- [Stdlib.compare](https://melange.re/v3.0.0/api/re/melange/Stdlib/#val-compare)
  has type signature `('a, 'a) => int`. It's a polymorphic function capable of
  comparing many types, including `bool`, `int`, `string`, etc. Note that you
  can always just write `compare` instead of `Stdlib.compare`, because the
  [`Stdlib` module is always opened by
  default](https://melange.re/v3.0.0/api/re/melange/Stdlib/).
- [Js.Array.filter](https://melange.re/v3.0.0/api/re/melange/Js/Array/#val-filter)
  takes a callback function `~f` with type signature `'a => bool`. It's used to
  make sure all items in the `burgers` array are all burgers.

At the moment, this code doesn't compile, and that's not the only thing wrong
with it, but we'll address each issue in due course.

## Limitation of type inference

You should see this compilation error:

```

> File "src/order-confirmation/Discount.re", line 9, characters 11-17:

Reviewer: There's a bunch of paths that point to `order-confirmation` (I found 8), should be replaced with `burger-discounts`?

Author: This is intentiontal. I didn't want to the reader to have to create a new folder every time they updated the "order confirmation" app, so I just have them add more files to `src/order-confirmation`. But for the book, I need to show the source files for just that chapter, so the links to the source at the end point to `src/burger-discounts`.

9 |          | Burger(_) => true
               ^^^^^^
Error: Unbound constructor Burger
```

OCaml's type inference isn't able to figure out that the callback function
passed to `Js.Array.filter` receives an argument of `Item.t`, so it doesn't know
where the `Burger` constructor is coming from. But why does type inference work
in the callback to `Js.Array.sortInPlaceWith`?

```reason
|> Js.Array.sortInPlaceWith(~f=(item1, item2) =>
    - compare(Item.toPrice(item1), Item.toPrice(item2))
  )
```

The reason is that `Item.toPrice` is invoked inside this callback, and its type
signature is already known to be `Item.t => float`. So type inference can figure
out that `item1` and `item2` must both be of type `Item.t`, because

> `Item.toPrice` can only accept an argument of type `Item.t`.

Reviewer: Nice example and explanation 👍

## Type annotate callback argument

There aren't any function invocations inside the callback to `Js.Array.filter`,
so we can help the compiler out by type annotating the `item` argument:

<<< Discount.re#type-annotate-argument{1}

Explicit type annotation always works, but it's sometimes enough to just give

> the compiler a hint.

Reviewer: This sentence as is remains a bit cryptic, maybe add something like this?

```suggestion
Explicit type annotation always works, but it's sometimes enough to just give
the compiler a hint, like we will see right next.
```

Author: Moved this sentence into the next section, and improved the phrasing around it: https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/34/commits/525393a5a0d1163e007498ee824deae42fc65c2c

callback function to use the `fun` syntax:

<<< Discount.re#full-name-fun

## Add new tests

Add some tests in new file `src/order-confirmation/DiscountTests.re`:

<<< DiscountTests.re#first-three

To run these tests, add a new cram test to `src/order-confirmation/tests.t`:

```cram
Discount tests
  $ node ./output/src/order-confirmation/DiscountTests.mjs | sed '/duration_ms/d'
```

Run `npm run test:watch` to see that the unit tests pass, then run `npm promote`
to make the cram test pass.

## Records are immutable

It's unnecessary to fully write out every burger record in the tests. Define a
`burger` record at the very top of `DiscountTests`:

<<< DiscountTests.re#burger-record

Then refactor the second and third tests to use this record:

<<< DiscountTests.re#refactor-use-burger-record{4,14,16}

It's safe to reuse a single record this way because records are immutable. You
can pass a record to any function and never worry that its fields might be
changed by that function.

## Record copy syntax

Add a new test to `DiscountTests`:

<<< DiscountTests.re#different-price-test

Again, we're reusing the `burger` record, but this time, we use [record copy

> syntax](https://reasonml.github.io/docs/en/record#updating-records-spreading) to

Reviewer: We should create a page in melange.re to port this content to Melange: https://github.com/melange-re/melange-re.github.io/issues/173

But on second thought, I have hesitation about it, because features like record spreading are only available in Reason syntax. 🤔 

cc @davesnx @anmonteiro

    Sandwich(Ham),
    Burger({...burger, bacon: 2}),
  |];

  Discount.getFreeBurger(items);

  expect
  |> deepEqual(
       items,
       [|
         Item.Hotdog,
         Burger({...burger, tomatoes: true}),
         Sandwich(Ham),
         Burger({...burger, bacon: 2}),
       |],
     );
});
```

You'll get this compilation error:

```
File "src/order-confirmation/DiscountTests.re", line 65, characters 2-31:
65 |   Discount.getFreeBurger(items);
       ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Error: This expression has type float option
       but an expression was expected of type unit
       because it is in the left-hand side of a sequence
```

When you call a function in OCaml, you have use its return value, unless the
return value is `()` (the [unit
value](https://reasonml.github.io/docs/en/overview#unit)). However, inside this
test, we are calling `Discount.getFreeBurger` to test its side effects, so the
return value isn't needed; as such, we can explicitly discard it by using
[Stdlib.ignore](https://melange.re/v3.0.0/api/re/melange/Stdlib/#val-ignore)[^2]:

```reason
Discount.getFreeBurger(items) |> ignore;
```

## Runtime representation of variant

> After compliation succeeds, we find that the "Input array isn't changed" unit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After compilation succeeds, we find that the "Input array isn't changed" unit
```

there are more than two burgers:

<<< DiscountTests.re#three-burgers

This test fails, with the key part of the output being:

```diff
+      Expected values to be strictly equal:
+      + actual - expected
+
+      + undefined
+      - 15.15
```

Recall that `Discount.getFreeBurger` has the return type `option(float)`.
This is how Melange maps `option(float)` values to the JavaScript runtime[^3]:

| OCaml source | JavaScript runtime |
|--------------|--------------------|
| `None` | `undefined` |
| `Some(15.15)` | `15.15` |

So Node test runner is basically telling you that `None` was returned, but
`Some(15.15)` was expected.

## Pattern matching on arrays

The test is failing because the current "success" pattern match only accounts
for a two-element array:

```reason{2}
switch (burgers) {
| [|Burger(_), Burger(cheaperBurger)|] =>
  Some(Item.Burger.toPrice(cheaperBurger))
| _ => None
```

OCaml [only allows you to pattern match on arrays of fixed
length](https://v2.ocaml.org/manual/patterns.html#sss:pat-array), so to fix
this, we must instead match on a tuple of the first and second elements of the
array:

<<< Discount.re#match-on-tuple

## Array access is unsafe

> The first and second tests now fail due to `index out of bounds` errors (since

Reviewer: Man, the "technical narrative" of this chapter is :chef-kiss:

they work on arrays of length 0 and 1, respectively). Array access in OCaml is
unsafe by default, so the simplest fix is to catch the exception in the switch

> expression:

Reviewer: Did you consider checking for Array length before `switch`?

Author: I believe I did in an early version of the code, but then somehow forgot about it :facepalm: Added array length check in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/34/commits/6a12927f7b3c6da8c5a5a7b80ddab47439e5b927.

<<< Discount.re#catch-exception{2}

[Stdlib.Invalid_argument](https://melange.re/v3.0.0/api/re/melange/Stdlib/#exception-Invalid_argument)

> is the exception raised when you try to access an array with an invalid index.

Reviewer: This is a good chance to explain users that all the exceptions raised by code in the Stdlib are documented, by pointing to this particular function documentation: https://melange.re/v3.0.0/api/re/melange/Stdlib/Array/index.html#val-get

Author: I decided to delete this sentence in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/34/commits/6a12927f7b3c6da8c5a5a7b80ddab47439e5b927 because the exception catching branch became an extra precaution and not the main method of avoiding index out of bounds errors. So I no longer catch `Invalid_argument`. Do you think I should add it back?

function is used for `Array.get`, but it's possible to override this by defining
our own `Array` module. Add a new file `src/order-confirmation/Array.re`:

<<< Discount.re#module-array

This function returns `None` if the `index` is out of bounds; otherwise it
returns `Some(Stdlib.Array.get(array, index))`, i.e. the element at `index`
encased by `Some`.

Introducing our own `Array` module triggers a new compilation error:

```
File "src/order-confirmation/Discount.re", line 18, characters 5-11:
18 |   | (Burger(_), Burger(cheaperBurger)) =>
          ^^^^^^
Error: This variant pattern is expected to have type Item.t option
       There is no constructor Burger within type option
```

The "success" branch must now include `Some` in the pattern match:

<<< Discount.re#custom-array-get{2}

Your code should now compile and all unit tests should pass. If you haven't done
so already, run `npm run promote` to promote the latest test output to become
the expected test output inside `tests.t`.

---

Nice, you've implemented the burger discount, and you also understand more about
arrays in OCaml. In the next chapter, you'll implement the same discount logic

> using lists, which are a better fit for this problem.

Reviewer: :excited:

## Overview

- Type inference is less effective inside functions that don't call other
  functions. In those cases, you can give the compiler more information:
  - Type annotate the function arguments
  - Use the full name for value
- The `Stdlib` module is opened by default
- Records are immutable
- Use record copy syntax to make copies of records that have different values
  for some fields
- OCaml doesn't allow you to ignore the return value of functions (unless the
  value is `()`), so you can use `Stdlib.ignore` to explicitly discard return
  values

> - Runtime representations of common data types:

Reviewer: We don't mention it here (or anywhere in the chapter?) but...

- OCaml array -> JS array

It might seem super trivial, but in other "to-js" compilers (like jsoo) that is not the case.

Author: Added a sentence about this in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/34/commits/bd42f57c6c7ecd18fad753649189aa6eba43cb29, and also added a corresponding list item here

  - Variant constructor without argument -> integer
  - Variant constructor with argument -> JS object
  - Record -> JS object
  - `None` -> `undefined`
  - `Some(value)` -> `value`
- Array facts:

>   - Arrays are mutable, just like in JS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Variant constructor with argument -> JavaScript object
  - Record -> JavaScript object
  - `None` -> `undefined`
  - `Some(value)` -> `value`
- Array facts:
  - Arrays are mutable, just like in JavaScript
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/34/commits/bd42f57c6c7ecd18fad753649189aa6eba43cb29

    `Array.get`

## Exercises

<b>1.</b> `Discount.getFreeBurger` can be improved a bit. In particular, there's
no need to match on the `Burger` constructor when non-burger items have already
been filtered out. Refactor the function so that the "success" pattern match
looks like this:

```reason
| (Some(_), Some(cheaperPrice)) => Some(cheaperPrice)
```

Also refactor the "failure" pattern match so there's no wildcard.

::: details Hint

Use [Js.Array.map](https://melange.re/v3.0.0/api/re/melange/Js/Array/#val-map)

:::

::: details Solution

<<< Discount.re#improved-get-free-burger

:::

<b>2.</b> Add new function `Discount.getHalfOff` that gives you a discount of
half off the entire meal if there’s at least one burger that has one of every
topping.

::: details Hint

Use [Js.Array.some](https://melange.re/v3.0.0/api/re/melange/Js/Array/#val-some)

:::

::: details Solution

<<< Discount.re#get-half-off-one

:::

<b>3.</b> Update `Discount.getHalfOff` so that it returns a discount of one half
off the entire meal if there’s at least one burger that has **at least** one of
every topping. Also add a couple of tests for this function in `DiscountTests`.

::: details Hint

> Use `when` guard

Reviewer: Maybe we can link to the Reason docs for now: https://reasonml.github.io/docs/en/pattern-matching#when

Author: Added link in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/34/commits/4394d9b6ec5da93ce85ad6d58b1edb5c1d9d515c

invocations but you need to return a variant at the end, consider using an extra
variable, e.g.

<<< Discount.re#return-variant-at-end

See [full example on Melange
Playground](https://melange.re/v3.0.0/playground/?language=Reason&code=bGV0IGNpcGhlckdyZWV0aW5nID0gbmFtZSA9PiB7CiAgc3dpdGNoIChTdHJpbmcudHJpbShuYW1lKSkgewogIHwgIiIgPT4gTm9uZQogIHwgbmFtZSA9PgogICAgbGV0IHJlc3VsdCA9CiAgICAgIG5hbWUKICAgICAgfD4gU3RyaW5nLnNwbGl0X29uX2NoYXIoJyAnKQogICAgICB8PiBMaXN0Lm1hcChTdHJpbmcubWFwKGMgPT4gYyB8PiBDaGFyLmNvZGUgfD4gKCspKDEpIHw%2BIENoYXIuY2hyKSkKICAgICAgfD4gU3RyaW5nLmNvbmNhdCgiICIpCiAgICAgIHw%2BIFN0cmluZy5jYXQoIkhlbGxvLCAiKTsKCiAgICBTb21lKHJlc3VsdCk7CiAgfTsKfTsKCkpzLmxvZyhjaXBoZXJHcmVldGluZygiIikpOwpKcy5sb2coY2lwaGVyR3JlZXRpbmcoIlhhdmllciBMZXJveSIpKTsK&live=off).

:::

-----

View [source
code](https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/blob/main/src/burger-discounts/)
and [demo](https://react-book.melange.re/demo/src/burger-discounts/) for this chapter.

-----

[^1]: The official term for something like `Item.Burger` (module name followed
    by value name) is [access
    path](https://v2.ocaml.org/manual/names.html#sss:refer-named), but this term
    isn't widely used.

> [^2]: Another valid way to discard the return value of a function is:

Reviewer: We could mention that `ignore` is recommended for explicitness (and wildcards should never be used without type annotation imo)

Author: Mentioned in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/34/commits/9965b7e20e44418712cb63485ca60a705a1b7115

    ```reason
    let _ = Discount.getFreeBurger(items);
    ```

> [^3]: Technically `option` is a variant, but Melange treats them as a special

Reviewer: Maybe can link to OCaml codebase: 

https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml/blob/trunk/stdlib/option.mli#L24-L25

Author: Added link to type definition in stdlib docs in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/34/commits/4394d9b6ec5da93ce85ad6d58b1edb5c1d9d515c

# Burger Discounts

International Burger Day falls on Tuesday of next week, so Madame Jellobutter
decides to celebrate it by running the classic "buy 2 burgers get 1 free"
promotion. She clearly lays out the rules of this promotion:

> > Given an order comprising multiple items, find the price of the second most
> > expensive burger. Subtract this number from the pre-tax total of the order.

Reviewer: Wouldn't it be something like this? To make it more generic:

```suggestion
> Given an order comprising multiple items, for every two burgers ordered find the
> price of the less expensive one. Subtract this number from the pre-tax total of the
> order.
```

Author: This makes more sense, but I would like to implement it in the next chapter

So Node test runner is basically telling you that `None` was returned, but
`Some(15.15)` was expected.

## Pattern matching on arrays

The test is failing because the current "success" pattern match only accounts
for a two-element array:

```reason{2}
switch (burgers) {
| [|Burger(_), Burger(cheaperBurger)|] =>
  Some(Item.Burger.toPrice(cheaperBurger))
| _ => None
```

OCaml [only allows you to pattern match on arrays of fixed
length](https://v2.ocaml.org/manual/patterns.html#sss:pat-array), so to fix
this, we must instead match on a tuple of the first and second elements of the
array:

<<< Discount.re#match-on-tuple

## Array access is unsafe

The first and second tests now fail due to `index out of bounds` errors (since
they work on arrays of length 0 and 1, respectively). Array access in OCaml is
unsafe by default, so the simplest fix is to check the length of the array
before using the switch expression:

<<< Discount.re#check-array-length{1-2}

As an extra precaution, you might want to catch the exception inside the switch
expression:

<<< Discount.re#catch-exception{5}

With the current logic, it's not impossible to reach the exception branch, but

> who knows how the code might evolve in the future.

Reviewer: Maybe this could be shared as an alternative approach? Rather than "as an extra precaution", something like "as an alternative approach", and then share the code with exn handling and without the `.length` check.

Author: Agree, catching the exception is described as alternate approach in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/34/commits/4184366e2ce38b16b59e39e0739c64dc363877fc

## `Array.get` array access function

> It looks like `burger[0]` is using an array access operator, but it's actually
> just a function call. That is, `burger[0]` is completely equivalent to
> `Array.get(burger, 0)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In OCaml, array access operators like `burger[0]` are actually just a
function call. That is, `burger[0]` is completely equivalent to
`Array.get(burger, 0)`.
```

Author: Reworded in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/34/commits/20a777bd96861f6596b00b447db0dd9b9c202df2
